And I guess the ultimate
example of this collaboration
between design and
development is the design system and
I do want to just touch on
the idea of a design system.
This is especially important when
working on larger websites, but
to be honest,
these days even when I'm working on
a small website I build
a design system as I go.
It just is the way that
I work these days and
I think it's very important when we think
about that post-launch iteration and
improvement to have
a design system in here.
I'm sure all of you know what a design
system is, but it is a set of
components and stars that helps you
ensure consistency across the website.
Why is it so important?
Well, when we would, especially on larger
sites, the design system will help
multiple designers and developers quickly
create new templates for a website of any
size or new functionality for
a website or web app and visualize those.
It helps coordination between
designers and developers.
It helps standards between
multiple designers.
They're just really useful tools.
In terms of when to use it,
when to start creating it?
Ideally, really from when you're right
at the beginning of the project,
start planning and design system as
soon as you're working on the design.
It's something that
a lot of people try and
retrofit after they've
produced the design.
And that's perfectly possible, but
actually there is a huge
advantage to doing it as you go in
the sense that makes you think
in terms of those components.
And stops you ending up with lots
of similar components that do
basically the same thing.
But you can create
a design system anytime.
I do work just to briefly
reiterate what I believe
should be quick key components
of a design system.
Styles is the obvious one styles
include your typographic styles, so
things like headings, quotations,
links, color palettes, all that stuff.
You've then got the elements which are
the smallest element of a design system.
I could start using Brad Frost's
atomic design systems, but really,
that's probably too granular for
what we're getting into here.
But basically, elements include the
fundamental building blocks of a website.
So these are things like buttons,
form fields, navigation forms, and
that thing, icons.
And then there's the components,
which are the more complex UI
elements that make up a design.
So I mean, you're looking at this thing.
So you can see how the text,
the insurmountable value
is styled in a certain way.
So that has a style associated with it.
The quotation mark,
the Chevron's, the pagination,
they're all elements are small components
and then together all of that the end
of that block fits together into
a quotation component that can be reused.
I'm probably today going into way more
detail than it's necessary, yeah.
>> Yeah, I have a question.
I'm going from l a developer's side.
>> Yeah.
>> We have a design system
>> But sometimes.
While talking to designers,
they quickly come up with why their
design has to be pixel, perfect.
>> Yeah.
>> Or like why they design is a special?
>> Yes.
>> How do you iron out that?
>> Yeah,
it's really good when you snap them.
[LAUGH] So
there's this two different issues there.
There's the Pixel Perfect issue, and
then they're coming up with designs or
design elements that aren't in
the design system, all right?
Let's deal with the pixel
perfect thing first I mean,
essentially that one it comes down to
that's not how the web works, all right?
And especially in the world
of responsive design
those pixel values just don't
exist in that way, all right?
So that's a bit of a frustrating
one because that's not
a difference of opinion,
that's a difference of fact.
[LAUGH] Pixel perfect design
is not possible on the web,
why are we even discussing this.
So it's a bit hard to argue with that one.
It probably is an indication they
come from a print background and
in which case I think I tend
to announce situations,
start talking a lot about responsiveness,
a lot about the different sizes.
I talk a lot about the accessibility and
the fact that people resize their,
like for me as I've reached 50 now,
and I'm getting long reading glass
I have to wear reading glasses.
So I've increased the font size on
everything which obviously completely
mucks up anybody's design, all right?
So it's exposing them to those
scenarios that help deal with that.
In terms of that are this is a component
we don't currently have, I think that's.
That is really an educational piece in
terms of wire design system exist and
how it benefits everybody, all right?
So if a design system is set, you have
a design system as a development team.
But if they're not using it
within the design department,
they're not getting any value out of it.
It's just a barrier to them, all right?
But once they've got the design
system set up in Figma,
as well Suddenly it's a huge boon to them.
They can produce designs and
mock-ups much quicker, and
the temptation on their part just
to use an existing component
rather than create a whole new
thing is huge because it's easy.
I could do that in seconds rather than
however long it takes me to great
something custom.
So the key though, I think,
is to get them set up with the design
system in Figma for them, all right?
So they've got all of those components,
and they can interact with them.
Then you'll find that they
naturally start using those more.
When they do want to create a component
that doesn't currently exist in
the design system.
That's fine, all right?
That's, okay?
A design system is a living, breathing
document and does change over time.
But there are cost implications of that,
all right?
That's gonna take you a lot more
development time than it is going to take
just to use an existing component.
So in that case, it's a matter of they
need to create a business case for it,
all right?
Simple as that, they need to justify
that particular element, all right?
Why that element has to be done in the way
it's done to offset the additional
hours work or
however long it will take to do that.
And they just need to be able to show
that even, anecdotally, all right?
We're not gonna make them do
a whole business case, but
there needs to be some justification.
And then it's not just done as
a one-off element, all right?
It's done, it becomes a new component.
So they can't just go,
well, we only need it here.
Well, if we only need it here it's
really not worth the developer's time to
build it cuz it a one of use case.
If it's an entirely new component
that could be used across the whole
site then that's more justifiable,
all right?
So that kinda pushes their thinking
towards this mutual base thinking.
But to be honest the big win if you
just get them set up in Figma with these
elements already built in they'll
just use them because it's easiest.
Does that help in any way?
>> Yeah.
>> It's not a black and
white simple answer but, yeah.
Okay, so yeah,
let's talk about organizing our
design systems because that begins to
think about what in your case, for
example, you've got to introduce
that into the design side.
Sometimes you're starting
completely from scratch.
In either cases,
I would say look, start simple,
don't if you've got like loads of
components probably don't try and
put all of them in Figma in one
go because it'll take too long.
[LAUGH] So just pick the most common
ones and create them to get them going.
Even if to begin with you do nothing
other than set up a few styles,
not even components, but
just here's the color palette.
Here's the typography so
that you don't have to pick the color
palette color every time you go,
that's, target red or whatever
that thing makes a big difference.
And then add the really basic components
start with things like the header and
the footer so that he can just
drop those in really easily and
then just add to it over time.
It's a bit of, it messes with your
mind working on a design system.
I don't know whether you found that,
but you can often overthink them.
I think one of the common
problems with design systems
is they need to strike the balance
between having too many
components where you end up
with components for everything.
Or completely abstracting
the components so
that they fundamentally
become meaningless.
So for example, it would be okay
to have a separate news component,
a news listing and
an events listing even though really
they're probably quite similar
in terms of fields and stuff.
And that's especially true
with the designer side.
From your point of view,
from a developer point of view,
you want to do that abstraction,
all right?
Because you want to keep
the code as lean as possible.
You want as little, tables in
the database or whatever it is you do,
I don't really understand.
But from a designer point of view,
I wanna create mock-ups.
So having a news listing mock-up and
events listing component the two separate
components that makes it easier for
me to create those mock-ups quickly.
Even though on your side, you probably
use the same code and database for both.
You see what I mean?
So sometimes there is,
you got to strike that balance.
I don't know whether any of that
makes sense, but hopefully it did.
And then finally, I'd say stay flexible.
Your design system should evolve.
You'll be adding new components when
you need to, as they come up, but
also seek to combine components when your
system starts to become too bloated,
that's normally a signal that
you need to move things on.
In terms of keeping your design and
your code components
in sync with one another,
which is a huge problem.
It's been solved thankfully by a tool
called zipline that I don't know whether
you've checked out, but it's really
good integrates straight with Figma.
And you can basically see the code and
what the element actually
looks like side by side.
And it will keep them all in sync and
stuff like that is really, good for
this thing.
Managing this stuff, and together it
makes it really powerful is a way for
a designer to quickly mock up a page.
And a developer to go, well that page is
made up of this component, this component,
this component, this component or
just grab those put it in job done.
That's where you're trying
to get to basically, but
actually a big area people overlook
when it comes to design systems and
components is actually the benefit that
it has to your content creators as well.
So, for example, my own website which
is just built on WordPress, all right?
And it's only my site, yet
he's still got a design system behind it.
Seems like a sledgehammer to crack
a nut but what it enables me to
do is I can add in things really
simply using Gutenberg blocks.
So for example, we've got a component on
the screen here which is just a quote that
can be shared on Twitter.
And I built a custom block really, really
simple custom block that basically allows
me to put in that content, and
it will display it in that way.
So you can use actually that component
mindset and that basic design
system even on a tiny little site,
it doesn't need to be on a big site.
The other thing I would say with
a design system is a design system
can go much further than
maybe you think it can.
I've written an article on this, and I'll
let you check it out in your own time and
read through it.
But a lot of people when people
think of a design system,
they're thinking of a set of
UI components, all right?
But I would say that a design
system is a lot more than that.
Or at least it's got
the potential to be that a design
system is a way of systemizing
design as the name implies, and
that isn't just about the UI components.
Or other things on the go here,
for example,
those design principles I talked about,
all right?
Those are a part of
a design system in my view,
they are part of the decision-making
process ,part of the infrastructure
around which your principles can
be created a content style guide.
Really, that's a part of
the design system as well,
it's the design of the content and
how the content integrates into it.
And even something like a service
manual or digital play book,
which documents how digital is run,
how your projects are run,
all of that could be a part of
your design system as well.
So, if you have a design system already,
I'd encourage you to maybe expand it
beyond just the UI components
that everybody thinks of.
And actually think of it more holistically
in terms of how you're running projects,
and how is that dealt with,
what your design principles,
what's your content guide,
all of that stuff.
So yeah,
all of these things you can be developing
alongside your build or
post launch if you need to.